Resource Book G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
human population using environmentally safe methods.
The current human population is about 7 billion and expected to be double in less than
40 years. Therefore, for the survival of human beings sustainable food production is
necessary.
To maintain sustainable food production following methods can be applied, which are
based on knowledge in biology.
• Production of high yielding varieties of plants and animals.
• Production of disease resistant plants and animal varieties.
• Improve the post harvest technological methods.
Understanding plant life
Plants are the primary producers in the world. All the animals depend directly or
indirectly on plants. Therefore understanding plant life is important. As the time human
population is increasing we need to increase the productivity. Therefore understanding
plant function and biology is important to produce high yielding plants, disease
resistant plants, etc.
Understanding diseases and causes
To maintain healthy human body one should have the knowledge of causes of the
diseases and their effects.
Some dangerous diseases which exist in current world are non communicable diseases
such as cancers, heart diseases, diabetes, chronic renal diseases and communicable
diseases such as dengue, AIDS, etc.
Cancers- causes for this is not fully understood yet. Cancers are one of the leading
causes of death .
AIDS- is a viral disease which is a serious and growing health problem worldwide.
Heart diseases- This is also a serious and growing health problem worldwide. Causes
are not fully understood yet.
Chronic renal diseases- In Sri Lanka, recentlyCKDu has become a serious health
problem.
Currently scientists are working on prevention, remedial measures and cures for such
diseases.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology Resource Book
Solving some legal and ethical issues
Knowledge and application of biological concepts is important in solving some legal
issues, such as parentage testing, in criminal investigations and to solve immigration
disputes.
DNA fingerprinting is used in above circumstances.
The nature and the organizational patterns of the living world
In accordance with different criteria we can see a diversity among living organisms.
Organisms are diverse based on size, shape, form and habitats.
• Living organisms show a wide range of variation in size, shape, form and habitat.
• Size – Bacteria – 0.25 μm – 2 μm to Giant Sequoia (Giant Red Wood)– 100m
• Shape – Organisms are diverse in shape, Ex: Cylindrical (earth worm), streamline
shape(birds, fish)
• Form –Unicellular (Amoeba), multicellular (any plant or animal)
• Habitat – Terrestrial (Rat), aquatic (Fish), arboreal (Loris), aerial(Birds)
Characteristics of organisms
In order to survive, each organism whether simple or complex must be able to perform
certain functions. Following features are the characteristics of organisms.
(i) Order and organization
From molecular level to biosphere there is an order and organization in organisms to
perform their biological activities efficiently.
Lower level components are organized in a methodical pattern in upper level to make
it most efficient.e.g: plant leaf and human eyes.
(ii) Metabolism
The sum of all chemical activities taking place in an organism is its metabolism. It
includes catabolic reactions and anabolic reactions.
(iii) Growth and development
All organisms begin their life as a single cell. During growth an irreversible increase
in dry mass occurs, which is characterized only by the living. Irreversible changes that
occur during the life span of an organism is development.Growth and development are
two consequent processes that happen in the life span of organisms.
(iv) Irritability and coordination
Irritability is the ability to respond to stimuli from both internal and external environment.
Movement of organisms occurs as a result of irritability and coordination. In animals
Resource Book G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
this happens as a result of coordinated efforts of nervous, hormonal, muscular and
skeletal systems
(v) Adaptation
Adaptation is a peculiarity of structure, physiology or behavior that promotes the
likelihood of an organism’s survival and reproduction in a particular environment.
E.g: Sunken stomata in Xerophytes, Viviparity in some mangroves, Splayed out foot
in camels.
(vi) Reproduction
Ability to produce offspring for continuous existence of species
(vii) Heredity & Evolution
Organisms have genes that pass from one generation to the next and control specific
physiological, morphological and behavioral characters of organisms.
Ability of organisms to change over time as a result of genetic modification is evolution
Many non living entities may have one or more of these characteristics but not all
of them e.g., crystals grow, waves move but only living organisms display all these
characteristics simultaneously or at some point during their life cycle.
By considering this it can be said that these are occurring in single celled organisms
as well as highly complex organisms such as humans and Anthophytes (flowering
plants).
Hierarchiel levels of organization of living things
The cell is the basic structural and functional unit of life. Some organisms are unicellular
while others are multicellular.Cell is composed of several organells which are formed
by different organic molecules.Then hierarchieal levels of organization of living things
can be constructed by using relevant examples at each level.
Molecules,Organells, Cells, Tissues, Organs, Organ systems, Organisms, Populations,
Communities, Ecosystems, Biosphere
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology Resource Book
Elemental composition of living matter
T here are about ninety two elements naturally occur in earth’s crust. Of which,
about 20-25% elements are essential to continue healthy life and reproduction.
(about 25- eleme